(Applause)
I should have died 30 years ago.
I am a survivor.
One of thousand Argentinean conscripts,
non-professional
soldiers, sent to fight
a war that should have
never took place.
I spent 60 days
surviving in a frozen well,
under infrahuman conditions,
alongside my mate Roberto,
without solid food,
and I lost 20 kilos of body weight.
We, clearly, had three enemies:
the weather, the British,
and, sadly our own chiefs,
who treated us
with a disdain for human condition
that was hard to understand.
Of course, faced with such hard scenario,
where we did not know
if we were going to survive
the malnutrition and maltreatment,
strengths began to grow out of nowhere.
We started making decisions.
Taking decisions in order not to die.
There was not much to do
but we began to do it,
to work on the day-to-day.
Simple things like keeping the well
as little wet as possible,
also, to run away to town, 10 kilometers,
to try to look
in the islanders' garbage bins,
or to break into a warehouse in despair.
And 10 kilometers back.
We ceased to do that for two reasons,
calorie expenditure was huge
and we found just few things,
and punishment was inhuman.
If we were caught
they would stretch us out.
The "stretch out" was
a crucifixion to the ground,
wrists and ankles tied,
with the jacket open, like animals,
during hours.
I saw at least 15 to 20 of my mates
in that condition,
for stealing food.
In this picture, quite shocking,
you can see my fellow survivors
from the company.
They had to deal with the worse.
They had take on the worse of the offense.
Ghosts. Town dwellers
who saw us in those conditions,
years later we came to know
that they called us "the zombies".
All heroes, all survivors, all brothers.
I learned a lot through that experience,
I learned to be more humble,
I learned to listen
and to ask to be listened.
I learned to appreciate
each thing with great intensity.
And above all, I started discovering
strengths I did not even imagine I had.
But learning-wise,
one of the most interesting ones
happened upon the end,
when the British were taking us back
as war prisoners,
on this transatlantic,
the Canberra, to Madryn.
I spent one week on board.
I was the translator,
and what happened there
was an amazing anthropological study.
4122 Argentinean prisoners
guarded by those same British
with whom we had been killing each other
the previous week.
A surrealistic experience.
Before getting on board,
when I got to know the British were there,
I thought, "We are in trouble,
we are going to beat each other to death."
But I was greatly surprised
when shortly afterwards
I was translating conversations
between the Argentinean and the British,
polite conversations,
filled with curiosity,
regarding how it had been
on the other side.
Conversations on music.
We listened to Pink Floyd and Genesis,
and so they did as well.
And that was the music on the ship,
what we listened to on the loudspeakers.
There I learned a big lesson:
I learned it would be impossible
to fight the enemy
once you get to know them,
once it ceases to be anonymous,
and that the enemy is always anonymous.
I also thought that
if one could put together
groups of young people
from countries in conflict,
so they could get to meet and talk,
like we Argentinean and British were doing
on that ship,
there would be less wars in the world
and less young people entering the army.
The things to do
on the ship were intensive,
I'd go over the ship translating,
and even helping at the surgery room,
which was impressing.
I covered the story,
when I got back from the war,
I did not talk for 20 years.
Until 2001 with the economic crisis,
the Argentinean catastrophe of 2001.
I had a shop in Venado Tuerto,
Santa Fe, where I live.
And I was, like millions of Argentinians,
suffering from great stress,
and in that setting
I had my first combat nightmare,
I had never dreamed.
I dreamed I was
in a well with my mates,
the morning of June 12,
the British had already taken the summit,
and tons of hot iron, mortars and cannons
are raining on us.
And everything is shaking
like in a earthquake,
there are two dead mate
outside who did not make it inside,
there is Roberto with splinters
in his hip and gut,
the final acceleration of the projectiles
is deafening,
I begin to pray.
All this is taking 8 hours,
from 8 am until 4 pm,
it feels as though vehicles
are pouring from the sky,
and I couldn't stop trembling.
I begin to pray
as though saying goodbye to this world,
my friends join me.
And while praying,
images from my family in slow motion
come to my mind,
playing with my grandmother,
with my mother,
and in that moment, inside that nightmare,
my cell phone rings.
It was the bank manager telling me:
"Miguel I have to close your account,
you have too many bounced checks."
On that day I realized
I could no longer hide,
and I looked for help.
I started talking,
for two years
under psychological treatment,
then to talk, and well,
I ended up writing a book.
But memories, the nightmare
did not come alone,
it came along with all the post traumatic
stress disorder symptoms
that one may think of.
I was quite depressed,
I lost a lot of weight,
and I had intrusive images for two years,
recurrent memories that will not stop.
But as when in the well,
where with Roberto
we started making everyday decisions,
at that moment
when I thought I was losing my mind,
I started working
on a day to day basis as well,
and to get better.
The things I've done may seem funny,
I used to cry in the morning,
and I even had dreams
where I killed myself.
And in those moments
I pushed myself out of bed,
I went running, swimming,
acting lessons, massage,
reiki, Bach flowers,
even a healing priest.
But at the end of the day I realized,
like in the well,
that I had to take charge of my own life.
And it was then
when I started to feel better.
I knew that in that healing path
I had to go through,
that I have already began to tread,
it was necessary to go back to that place,
to the Islands.
Life made me meet James Peck,
a brother in life,
a person that changed my life.
James is here with us,
he is very shy,
he doesn't want to be pointed out,
but he is with us.
He came to Buenos Aires
with those paintings,
he had painted all the pain
we the Argentinean had undergone,
he had captured it on canvas
and we were part of his own ghosts.
Life made us brothers,
James is a very brave person,
he is a free person
with independent thinking,
James received the Argentinean ID
from the President last year,
I had the honor to be with him.
But what James did not tell me
on that first trip,
when I wnet back with all my family,
was that his father,
Terry Peck, had fought against me.
Terry had been the one who guided
the Brtitish soldiers to where we were,
and ended up fighting
few meters aways from us.
I met him in 2000,
an incredible person.
We visited the battle fields together,
we showed each other where we had fought,
we made a tost
to the memory of our dead mates,
and we found common ground,
because we had fought against each other
in an unnecessary war.
And we also exchanged berets,
as you can see in this photograph.
I remember him dearly.
Terry passed away 6 years ago,
and I am sure that
if he were watching this,
he would be smiling like in that photo.
One of the most moving events
in this story took place
during the last days of combat.
I went as an interpreter as well,
they ordered me to go on a patrol
to a little house in a farm
that was allegedly broadcasting
to the fleet.
We set out quite early,
everything was frozen,
the frost was appalling,
and we were quite undernourished,
we got dizzy with every movement,
my rifle was heavy.
We got to the house as dying men.
At this point, the beginning of June,
a mate of us died from hypothermia
and undernourishment,
before the British arrived.
Other four set foot on a mine
in one of those hikes I also took,
and they died as well.
Other five or six fired themselves
in their feet in order to be evacuated.
That was the desperate situation
in which I arrive to that little house,
and upon arrival
I began eating desperately,
and screamed in English
if there was anybody there.
The first thing that called my attention
was the smell of that house,
a scent quite familiar.
And a very nice English pullover
called my attention,
I put it close to my nose
and I was connected with my own home.
I felt as thought there was somebody
in that house watching over me saying:
"Just a bit longer, Miguel,
you're coming back, you'll be fine."
When I left with that pullover
with which I felt stronger,
it gave me protection.
I thought: I am going to come back here
one day, and I'll talk to these people.
Life give me that amazing opportunity,
25 years later.
I gave it back to Lisa,
the pullover was from his father.
She said: "My dad died
because of the stress of this war,
a few years later,"
and I answered: "So did my mother".
It was a sublime moment,
we had tea together, and when leaving,
John, one of the Island dwellers,
in his four-wheel drive,
while crossing the river,
said something that filled my heart:
"Feel proud of yourself, Miguel,
you are building bridges."
(Applause)
I think that is a key component
in every human relationship,
to build less walls and more bridges.
When we arrived to La Plata's regiment,
while coming back, the military
gave us a rally
they made us sign sworn declarations
so that we wouldn't tell anything,
and all the families were outside
desperately waiting for news,
and the families of dead soldiers
were receiving
elusive information from the military.
They told them they would arrive
the next day,
and they were dead.
That memory breaks my heart,
and from here I send a hug to all of them.
Those families have suffered too much.
So I meet with my brother in the crowd,
who had also jumped
from the regiment's wall,
he takes me to the car
where my parents were,
and I went running along
that cobbled road in La Plata,
in the cold, in June,
and I hear my mother's screams,
and I could barely see her,
I saw like an aura,
and I dive into her trembling arms.
It was an amazing moment,
it was the most moving moment of my life.
And when the hard moments of my life
come to mind,
this moment always comes,
and in happy moments as well.
It's like a virgin accompanying me.
When I got back,
my body was decimated,
I had lost 20 kilos,
my teeth were loose
because of the scurvy,
my neck thin, I was flesh and bones,
the soles of my feet with necrosis
because of the ice,
and so I entered a state that nowadays
I deem as "the survivor's euphoria".
I would set the alarm clock early,
even though I had nothing to do,
in order to enjoy life.
I'd go out, my body decimated,
but with such strength
and such happiness of being alive,
and I'd go out into the streets
and everything would thrill me,
the smell of grass recently cut,
the singing of birds,
even TV colors seemed thrilling.
And people visiting would say:
"You are different, you are better,"
and would reply: "Of course I am better."
But at that moment I did not know
how to explain it,
it was the survivor's euphoria.
They threw a party at home
with friends and family.
Have you watched "Castaway"
with Tom Hanks?
When he comes back from the island,
they throw him a party,
it was exactly the same.
I was in another state of mind,
I had come from a spiritual retreat,
and I had come with all those teachings,
which aren't learned in many lives,
nor at any university.
I had come with that strength
and felt very strong,
and at that party everybody
was drinking and talking loudly,
and I wanted to be alone.
I went to the kitchen
and turned on the burners,
and while warming my hands,
I started to think inwardly:
You will have to keep this strength
because no matter
how much love they'd give,
they will find it hard to understand
your story in depth,
you are going to be alone
with these memories all your life.
And I thought as well: if I am able
to freeze this survivor's euphoria,
this appreciation of simple things
that I am feeling now,
because I saw all those people
living lethargic lives,
stressed by material stuff,
even bored,
and I was with all this learning
and was conscious
that in being aware
of how beautiful life is,
I was going to find my main handicap,
my strength,
and that my life was going
to be different,
I was going to live a happier life.
After 30 years,
that conviction remains intact,
the survivor's euphoria stayed,
and I feel very proud,
I am filled with emotion
for having come today to share
my survivor's euphoria with you all.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)